Should public libraries engage in projects for urban revitalization and
if so, in which role? What, if this revitalization leads to
gentrification, social segregation and displacement of open drug users
or other socially vulnerable groups? This text will try to deal with
these issues.

In recent years, discussions and social movements around the question of
urban revitalization, the "right to the city" and/or gentrification have
emerged with a remarkable vitality in Europe, Australia, and North
America. (Lees, Slater & Wyly 2008) More often than not, art and
cultural projects became part of these controversies. Sometimes,
libraries happen to be used as part of the revitalization attempts of
urban spaces as well. This is what happens in Lausanne, Switzerland and
this text will use Lausannes situation – both the neighborhood of the
Flon and the Place de la Riponne – as case study for this phenomenon.
But: the dealt issues one can find in this text are not limited to
Lausanne. Big cities in Europe and the Global North keep growing, almost
all of them have strategies to govern these growth processes. In an
increasing number of cities those changes lead to social conflicts,
some, like the protests in Berlin, New York or San Francisco with a
widespread coverage, but most of them only with local visibility. Either
way, public libraries in those cities can’t ignore upcoming conflicts
around urban revitalization and/or gentrification, because they are
affected by changes and are part of them at the same time.

The remaining text is structured as follows. (1) It discusses the
gentrification process and its importance in recent urban development by
introducing a three phase model. (2) Afterwards, text continues with a
greater insight in Lausannes situation, especially to the neighborhoods
of Flon and Riponne. The text ends (3) with an outline of the role of
public libraries and proceed with a formulation of proposals for a
further discussion in the library community.

### Urban revitalization, gentrification, and the displacement of the socially excluded

In recent years, gentrification has become one of the pressing topics of
social uproar in different countries, especially in big cities and
metropolises. (Holm 2014, Prince 2014, Andres & Grésillon 2013, Naegler
2012, DeSena 2009, Lees, Slater & Wyly 2008) Starting as a term used in
urban sociology and by political activists it is now used as a common
term in newspapers, everyday discussions and political programs. In some
cities like Berlin or Hamburg gentrification seems to be a social
development which concerns nearly everyone. As this former scientific
term becomes more and more widespread, the meaning of gentrification
broadens up. It is sometimes an expression of a feeling of an unwanted
shift in the urban landscape and culture, not always grounded in
empirical facts. And it is a postmodern concept, as usually those people
which seem to drive gentrification are the same people who want to limit
negative consequences of this urban change.

Gentrification is at first a term for a tremendous rise of rents. Sooner
or later, a change in the population living in certain urban
neighborhoods happens, as it seems as if the more poor and more
vulnerable population of those neighborhoods is gradually driven out of
the gentrified area. But it is more than that. Gentrification also
describes the change of the culture, the social structure, and the
lifestyle in one neighborhood, usually marked by the closure of the
infrastructure used by poor people for their everyday life – like cheap
supermarkets or stores, basic pubs and so on –  and a rise of the number of
cafés, restaurants, shops and infrastructure for a better paying
clientele at the same time. This is not just a question of prices,
it is also a question of different cultures, whereas the new bars and
shops usually seem to be oriented towards a clientele that is more
interested in culture, health and alternative lifestyles.

But: not all of those changes are seen as a bad thing, not everybody
conceives them as negative. For instance, more art, a wider range of
eating offers (Stock 2013) or a less violent street live (DeSena 2009)
are quite often described as a good outcome of the processes known as
gentrification. Most often these processes are linked to the
disappearing of visible illegal behavior. Groups of public visible drug
users are often among the first ones being targeted by those changes and
tend to disappear quite fast. For instance, the fight of local stores
and neighborhood groups against a public injection room marked, in a
way, also the beginning of the active gentrification of the
"Schanzenviertel" in Hamburg. (Naegler 2012)

Still, there are other terminologies used to describe these process,
especially when those changes are planned. Then they are discussed as
"urban renewal" or "urban revival". Usually, "urban revival" is fostered
by the cities itself, but also by organizations commissioned by the
cities too – like the "Quartiersmangement" in Berlin or the
"Stadterneuerungs- und Stadtentwicklungsgesellschaft Hamburg" (Naegler
2012) – or private investors. Lees, Slater and Wyly (Lees, Slater & Wyly
2008) point out that cities and investors usually avoid the term
gentrification by choice, even outright disputing the legacy of the
term. They understand gentrification – or, in their words, "urban
development" – as a favorable process, providing much more positive than
negative effects for the respective neighborhoods and their inhabitants.

These processes are even more complex, as they sometimes seem to be
triggered by groups who explicitly don’t want to displace poor and
socially excluded people, but try to live alternative lifestyles – like
artists, students or member of different subcultures – or even people
who contest the current economic system, such as left-radical centers
like the "Rote Flora" in Hamburg (Naegler 2012). At the same time, not
every project of urban revival succeeds, not every neighborhood that
could become gentrified will do so, and simultaneously, other areas of
the cities become less gentrified or even impoverished.

#### A Model of Gentrification

A widely used theoretical model to explain gentrification in the context
of urban sociology was introduced by Andrej Holm.[^1] His model will be
used in this text.

Gentrification, as it is described in Holms model, is triggered first
and foremost by the interests of homeowners to rise the rents of their
housings up until the point where they get the most profit out of them.
This can, but does not have to, include the massive renovation of
housing and infrastructure that should support the quality of housing.
Every housing that is up for rental has a potential rent, which is
defined by the quality of housing, by the infrastructure and culture
around the housing, by the whole renting market of a city, by interests
and financial potentials of the possible renters, but also by political
guidelines, zoning and policies. Homeowners tend to try to exploit those
potential rents – or, in other words, close the "rent gap" –, but are
usually not able to max out those rents in a short time, because a rise
of rents is not only in their hands. Usually, they try to get the
potential rents in cases of new tenants.[^2]

Gentrification is understood as a process, not a static situation. As
every process it can be interrupted, slow down or change direction.
Nevertheless, Holm (2011) presents a model of gentrification that
describes three distinct phases.

-   Phase 1: An urban area is suited for gentrification. Rundown
    building stock exists in an acceptable quality or can be renovated
    towards such quality, rents are low, usually there are a great
    number of vacant spaces or shops. Typically, those areas are part of
    the inner city or nearby, with public transportation already in
    place. The number of people looking for a relocation into the inner
    city is rising.

-   Phase 2: "Pioneers" move into the area, usually because of cheap
    rents and/or the search for free space to try alternative forms of
    lifestyle. Those alternative styles can include political activism,
    art, alternative forms of personal live and the like. Quite often
    those pioneers combine high cultural and social capital with little
    economic capital, e.g. artists who do art, but doesn’t gain much
    wealth from selling it or students, which study and accumulate
    cultural and educational capital without making money out of this
    capital, yet. The look of the neighborhood changes: street cafés,
    art galleries, diverse forms of restaurants and shops tailored to
    the pioneers emerge. Over the time, rents tend to rise, old shops
    and infrastructures tend to disappear and the population changes as
    well. Usually, the most vulnerable groups tend to disappear from the
    landscape.

-   Phase 3: In the third phase of gentrification, the culture of the
    everyday life has changed completely. New tenants pay high rents,
    usually the building stock is renovated and kept in high quality.
    The street life is dominated by people from the higher social
    classes and the infrastructure is tailored to their demands. For
    instance, discounter chains have vanished, more expensive organic
    grocery stores have emerged. The rhythms of the neighborhood have
    changed according to the inhabitants, e.g. were bars tailored for
    students and young artist tend to be open until the early morning,
    bars in highly gentrified areas tend to close early, as most of the
    inhabitants tend to work in "normal" nine-to-five jobs. Not only
    poor people have left the neighborhood, but pioneers of the second
    phase did also. Sometimes they have become older and richer, like
    students who finished their education, entered the job market and
    settled with children. Although most of the inhabitants tend to have
    liberal or leftist political views, and sometimes engage in favor of
    alternative lifestyles, most of those have vanished or have been
    incorporated into the picture of the neighborhood, without being
    actually lived.[^3]

-   A possible phase 4 of hyper-gentrification is only suggested by Holm
    (2011): Sometimes neighborhoods or parts of them evolve into a phase
    of hyper-gentrification, where those areas become home of much
    richer people, with an international focus, usually marked by luxury
    apartment buildings. They become part of what may be better termed
    as "global cities": a network of places, interconnected, depending
    on the city functions, like the amassing of cheap but talented
    labor, and highly specialized small businesses belonging to the
    tertiary sector, but without a real touch to the rest of the
    neighborhoods they are in. (Sassen 2001)

Holm (Holm 2011, Holm 2014) emphasizes that most of the social conflicts
surrounding gentrification tend to happen in the second phase (see e.g.
DeSena 2009, Prince 2013), although the real problems of expulsion and
exclusion are to be found in the third phase. The moving in of pioneers,
openings of street cafés as well as organic grocery stores, or the first
"sightings" of tourists don’t pose a threat to the more vulnerable
inhabitants; but rising costs of rent and living do. But sometimes such
visible changes are necessary as catalyst for protest against
gentrification to happen, because the conflicts then would become
concrete. (Holm 2014)

Gentrification usually is a longtime process of replacing a population
with a significant much richer and more powerful population, starting
with the most vulnerable. For instance, in Berlin it is usually not the
rich who follow when the poor move out of a gentrified area or
apartment, but slightly less poorer people, which are then followed by
even a little more richer ones and so on. (Holm 2014, Bonal & Gude 2014)
But still, when gentrification starts to enter the second phase in one
area, the number of "gentrification moments" (Prince 2014) starts to
rise. Today, people and activists seem to be alerted to such changes and
moments, compared to some years ago.

#### Culture and Gentrification

An open issue – both in the scientific and the societal discussion – is
still the connection between culture and gentrification. Usually the
opening of cultural places like art galleries is seen as a trigger of
gentrification. This is consistent with Holms 3-phase-model: Pioneers
moving in a previously impoverished area mark the beginning of the
second phase. Artists and people with high cultural assets are seen as
such pioneers, which doesn’t mean, that they always intend to be such
pioneers. Many a time, they specifically try to reject that role. They
are the ones which try to bring more aspects of cultural life to such an
area, but don’t want to repulse people. Sometimes they try to reflect
their situation, sometimes they strictly reject it.[^4]

The idea of a conjunction between cultural activities and gentrification
is a result of the discussion about a "creative class". This creative
class, it is believed particularly in institutions which are in the
position to plan the development of cities, is a term for people doing
"creative" work, whereby this includes quite different professions, from
artists to marketing specialists, from actors and writers to architects
and entrepreneurs. Such a creative class should need each other to be
productive, for example architects and entrepreneurs should need the
stimulus of art and theaters as well as the concentration of a busy
urban live. Although, empirical facts about the realities of the
"creative class" are ambiguous, more and more city officials got
convinced – with the help of academic or economic advisors –, that they
need more members for flourishing their cities. (Terrin 2012) Hence,
they try to stimulate urban revitalization with the help of creative
endeavors. Art galleries and little theaters are funded, sometimes only
on a short term basis, festivals of different forms are invited or
invented, special regulations for pubs, like longer opening hours or the
relaxation of the enforcement of regulations, are put in place,
museums are opened, and even libraries are included into the strategies
for urban redevelopment.

At the same time, pioneers are more inclined to do such creative work on
their own, for instance by opening up art galleries, pubs and other
entrepreneurial ideas their like to start up with, including organize
cultural events. It is not clear, if any of this activities leads
directly to gentrification. Schuetz (Schuetz 2013) points out that art
galleries in European and US-American cities, when they are established
or move, do not follow the movements of gentrification, but rather
historical patterns of their respective city and orient themselves on
already existing galleries and museums. On the other hand, nearly every
area that was affected by gentrification in the last decades possessed a
share of some forms of cultural infrastructure. (Terrin 2012)

While the data are not much coherent and even though not all forms of
cultural activity lead to gentrification, it is not possible to talk
about gentrification or urban revitalization without reflecting on
cultural activities, particularly those tailored not just to a small
elite but to a wider audience, like for instance libraries.

### The case of Lausanne

Lausanne, which will be
used here as the case study object, is the fourth largest city of
Switzerland, with about 130.000 inhabitants and the second biggest one
in the French speaking part of this country. However, compared to cities
in the neighboring countries, it is a major city with a rather average
size. It is the capital of the Canton of Vaud and among other things,
home to the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Lausanne, the
University of Lausanne as well as the International Olympic Committee.
Situated at the Lac Léman and at the border of Switzerland and France,
Lausanne today is known as the main spot for the clubbing scene in the
area, as well as a center for cultural events. It is, compared to other
Swiss municipalities, quite a young and busy city with a high number of
young people and students.

#### From deserted warehouses to Flon-Flon, from Flon-Flon to Flon

The example of the Place de la Riponne in Lausanne, which this case
study is focusing on, has an important predecessor in the city, the area
of Flon. The Flon is an area, highly gentrified today, only one metro
station away from the Riponne. From the 1950s onwards this was a
rundown, post-industrial district, situated in the middle of the city,
but in a small valley, some meters below the city level and filled only
with partly used warehouses. Subject to different plans for
revitalization and societal conflicts (Zuppinger 2012), it became a
center for alternative culture in Switzerland under the name
"Flon-Flon". Since last century turn, the Flon increasingly became the
"in quarter" of Lausanne for another kind of young, urban, but not
always alternative or "hip" groups of people. Although one of the places
for nightlife in the city, today it seems like a big outdoor
commercial-zone in contrast to the more bottom-up culture of the 1990s.
Whereas the transformation in the 1990s was made possible by the
conflicts of the years before, but impelled by people that could be
described as pioneers according to Holms model, the turn after 2000,
enforced by the city and the main proprietor of the Flon, can be linked
to the third phase.

Until the 1950s, the Flon was a port on the way to the nearby Lac Léman,
used primarily for industrial goods. Most of the industry situated in
the Flon left the area in course of the years. This was consistent with
movements one could also observe in other European cities, were the
actual industrial production got sourced out. As in other cities too,
this left brownfields of slowly deteriorating buildings. Every city had
to deal with its brownfields. Some, most renowned Detroit (2012), left
most of this area open in case the city is able to change their current
course of urban development. Other cities like Marseille tried to
reanimate their usable area by installing cultural institutions (Andres
& Grésillon 2013) or, like Berlin in the 1990s, left the horizon of
their not used space quite open and developed a culture of short-term
uses (Andres & Grésillon 2013). In this context, Lausannes situation is
specifically marked by a constant shortage of housing, most notably
affordable ones. This is consistent with the situation of most larger
Swiss cities. (Andres & Grésillon 2013) Therefore the Flon, as an only
rarely used space next to the city center, was for decades a subject to
plans for different uses. Nevertheless, none of these plans bear fruit.
In 1984, the city together with the main real estate of the Flon,
proposed a project for a city interstate, which would have included the
demolition of the existing buildings. The plan was an example of plans
for automotive cities. While some of these plans were implemented in
other cities, in Lausanne a group of concerned citizen formed the group
"Groupe Action Urbanisme", which took to the streets against such
schemes. Later, this group and other citizens formed the "Association
pour un aménagement harmonieux du Flon" (APAHF, Coalition for a harmonic
development of the Flon). For the next decades, the actions of the APAHF
influenced to evolution of the Flon.

APAHF preferred a development of the city they called "l’urbanisme du
rêve" (urbanism of dreams or utopian urbanism), which aimed to include
interests and participation of different groups and had the vision of a
more lively city. (Zuppinger 2012[^5]) In 1986, APAHF won a popular vote
against this plan. Such popular votes are common in Switzerland on such vast projects.
The city had zoned the Flon as "industrial site", which meant, that
other ways of utilization like flats or commercial projects were not
possible as long term alternatives. This situation left the real estate
in an uneasy position. There was little industry to settle there. A part
of the Flon became a carhouse for the public buses in Lausanne, another
building at the edge of the Flon was turned into a shopping center. But
most of the old warehouses were rented out in the years ahead for short
term leases like galleries, bars, alternative clubs et cetera. In the
early 1990s, the Flon had become a center for alternative cultures,
mixing interests of artists, political activists and mostly small shop
owners, above all galleries, second hand shops and bookshops. (Andres &
Grésillon 2013) In other words: the Flon moved into the second phase of
gentrification, although tenants were only slightly affected, as there
were only a small number of flats on this site too. This development was
only possible because of the Flons vague status then, leading to an open
attitude by the real estate, which gave out short-term rent, and the
city which didn’t impose another development plan of the Flon.

Starting in 1989, the commercial center mentioned above, published a
magazine, "gazette du flon", which in the first year was used as a
marketing tool for the center. After the first year, the magazine was
taken over by another editorial team and focused on the Flon itself.
Nevertheless, in the third number of the Gazette, still published by the
center, an article that dealt with the emerging art scene first can be
found there. (Anonymous 1989) In the short time between the popular vote
in 1986 and 1989, the image of the Flon had changed completely.

![The 1989 issue of the "gazette du flon" mentioned above with the first article about the galleries at the Flon, one of the first signs of a cultural life in this neighborhood for commercial purposes.](img/BlumerSchuldt01.jpg)

Still, in 1999, the city and the real estate made a crucial turn.
(Zuppinger 2012) A new plan for the Flon emerged. This plan proposed a
new face for the whole area, including a renovation of most of the
houses – which, until then, were painted by the new users, mostly with
different forms of street art –, a new zoning, and a commercialization
of the Flon. It also previewed a new building for the subway station at
the Flon. This led to new forms of social protest, in which the APAHF
participated, which were interested in an evolution of the area in a
manner that would preserve not only the image but also the spirit of the
alternative Flon-Flon of the 1990s.

Nevertheless, in longer struggles, most of the pioneers of the Flon-Flon
left the area, and new, more commercialized bars, clubs and restaurants
moved into the Flon. Still, there is some free space to be found at the
Flon, some art galleries still exists. The renovation of warehouses led
to a postmodern, but anorganic look. The people who are using the Flon
now, mainly at the weekends, would not usually claim themselves as
members of alternative cultures. The image of a wild and creative Flon
is preserved, but used for a different purpose. (Zuppinger 2012, Andres
& Grésillon 2013, Alonso-Provencio & Da Cunha 2013) This could be
interpreted as the third phase of gentrification, fostered by a city and
private investors with clear financial and political interests.

Interestingly, one of the last, still not built, buildings of new urban
development plan is a "maison du livre et du patrimoine" (house of the
book and cultural heritage), a public library and archive. (Ville de
Lausanne, direction des travaux service d’architecture 2012) This
building, as the documents for the architectural competition state
explicitly, has to fit into the new style of the Flon. It could be
stated here: after building this library, the transformation of the Flon
will be complete. The library will find a quite different user base at
today’s Flon, than it would have in the time of the Flon-Flon. Most of
the groups that made the Flon-Flon a special space have been gone. It
would be interesting to ask, whereto they have moved or if they just
have ceased to exist as subcultures. One of these groups, the scene of
open drug users, once a steady group of users of the neighborhood of the
Flon, seem to have moved upwards the hills of Lausanne to the Place de
la Riponne.

![Flon, situation 2014. On the right the last remainders of the "old" Flon-Flon of the 1990s, on the left the backside of the renovated buildings. The barracks on the right will be demolished, if the "maison du livre et du patrimoine" will be build instead.](img/BlumerSchuldt02.jpg)

#### The Place de la Riponne

As mentioned before, the Place de la Riponne is just one metro station
further up the hill from the neighborhood of Flon, surrounding together
with the Flon the economic most important parts of the city of Lausanne.
The spacious place is marked by the Palais de Rumine, which hosts the
Musée des Beaux-Arts, the Cantonal Library and other cultural
institutions. During the last decades, the place has lost its reputation
as cultural center, due to different innercity movements, such as the
Hotel Mövenpick, which moved to the neighborhood of Ouchy at the Lac
Léman, or the closing of the cinema Romandie, once the biggest cinema in
the city, which, after a transformation into a club, moved to a new
location next to the Flon. (City of Lausanne 2003)

For the last decade, local journals mostly mentioned the Riponne in a
negative manner, mainly because of the open drug scene. This scene may
be a result of the economic re-animation of the Flon and one could
assume that the drug users, one of the socially most vulnerable groups,
installed themselves on the Riponne, after having been repulsed as one
of the first groups by the ongoing gentrification process on the Flon.
Today, the open drug scene at the Riponne contains about 50 to 80
persons, organized in different groups, loosely oriented by perceived
ethnic characteristics, and constantly changing its different
"locations" on the place itself. In 2007, the city of Lausanne tried to
open a public injection room. After a very aggressive debate, the
population rejected the proposal in a public vote with a result of
54.6%. (RTS 2007, Kraushaar 2012) Today, a mobile bus called
"Distribus", operated for the social-work foundation "Accueil à Bas
Seuil" offers first aid, information and exchange of sterile material
for the described target group. There is a helping infrastructure in
place for the drug users and even if they are described from the outside
as "dangerous to everyone", mostly towards children, the groups
generally remain in their own community and solve the problems on their
own. (Zehr 2014; see also Naegler 2012 for nearly the same discussions
in Hamburg.)

Still, the emptiness and wasted space of the place, which apparently
fosters the open drug scene, turns the place into a blemish of urban
planning. At the beginning of 2011, a proposal for a cultural
re-animation of the Riponne including a new cultural center with a
public library, has been announced by the minister of culture.
(Cordonier 2011) When she left the local politics shortly after this
last announcement, the project disappeared from the public attention and
apparently nothing happened. Only a few months later, another local
politician submitted a so called "Postulat", a parliamentary initiative,
which asked the city for a sustainable solution of the South-East of the
place, where the majority of the drug users was situated at this time.
(Laurent 2011) As a direct answer, a few months later another Postulat
asked for the protection of the Northern part of the place, as well.
(Blanc 2011) Both initiatives were in the interest of several shop and
cafe owners within this area. According to them, the hygienic conditions
and security situation was intolerable and the repeating conflicts
within the drug using groups kept customers away. As a last action, a
petition with 1.435 signers, collected and submitted to the communal
council by a pub owner at the Northern end of the place (Oberti 2011),
turned the interest of the media to the Riponne and nearly forced the
local politics to find an appropriate solution. (RTS 2011) During the
upcoming year, nothing really concrete in direction to a cultural
re-animation happened. The media attention was mostly turned to another
socially difficult area, not far away from the Place de la Riponne,
where the open drug scene, prostitution and homelessness clashed with
the inhabitants of an economic better-off quarter. (Barata 2012) In
autumn 2012 and spring 2013, media wrote about violent conflicts at the
Riponne. (Détraz & Giroud 2012, Maspoli 2013) As Géraldine Morel argues,
this growth of violence can be explained by the fact that the drug users
and homeless people started to feel attacked themselves, because the
number of present players, the rise of drug prices, and the constant
tension between vendors and buyers increased. (Morel 2013) They felt
that the space they could use for themselves became smaller and smaller.

It was in spring 2014, when the city of Lausanne announces several
cultural actions, which took place during summer of the same year. (City
of Lausanne 2014) Soon afterwards, mobile snack bars are installed at
the Southern end of the place, one of the meeting points of the drug
users. Then, in the context of the cultural intervention project
"Lausanne Jardin 2014", flower checks at free disposal were installed at
the Riponne as well as other places in the city which should have been
watched after by the marginals (De Paola 2014). An ephemeral restaurant/bar,
the "Café Grenette", was installed at the Northern end of the place,
which offered, besides open and free sitting opportunities, cultural
activities, such as concerts, lectures and activities for children. The
concept included a mobile branch of the public library of Lausanne in a
container offering books and open-air reading opportunities.[^6] This
project lasted the entire summer and ended in October 2014. (Rohrer
2014)

![The container of the branch of the public library at the Place de la Riponne.](img/BlumerSchuldt03.jpg)

![A panorama of the public library container and the reading possibilities in front of it. The small box in the front contains information for free use.](img/BlumerSchuldt04.jpg)

![A birds-eye view of the Café Grenette.](img/BlumerSchuldt05.jpg)

All these activities were taken in order to permit a better mixture
between the social vulnerable groups and better situated social groups,
as the local politics claimed. (De Paola, Cachin 2014) They are a good
example for how gentrification takes place. In Holms model, the Riponne
was suited for gentrification during a period of more than ten years,
meaning: in the first phase of gentrification. Even if it is not clear
how this process started, probably the upgrading of the Flon into the
third phase of gentrification around the year 2000 played an important
role. The Riponne now seems entering the second phase of gentrification,
where pioneers emerge in cities everyday picture, where young, hip and
wealthy people come by and make use of their offers, whereas the social
vulnerable groups such as the drug users and drug sellers are expelled
slowly. In the case of the Riponne, a forced expulsion in order to
repress the open drug scene is visible in the mobile snack bars at the
Southern part of the place, the Café Grenette and the public library
branch at the Northern end, and even in a more noticeable police
involvement. (De Paola 2014, Cachin 2014)

It is a question of time, how the Riponne will develop and if the
activities really continue into a full flown gentrification process. As
described before, gentrification is a process, not an automatism. Until
now, the case of the Riponne remains interesting, because the whole
revitalization process is apparently targeted to make the open drug
scene disappear, but until now it only led to a position shift of the
scene within the place. The "problem" seems not resolved so far, but
just relocated. But, at the same time, the Riponne became a new in-place
in Lausanne, where new shops have opened in previously closed spaces.
Moreover, different projects of renovation take place that could solve
problems the city have not been perceived as "important enough"
before.[^7]

As always, these processes of gentrification lead to the question, for
whom the space is reanimated. For everybody? For the city? For "the
right folks"? Or for the former users? For future inhabitants? The open
drug scene at the Riponne is only the most visible group of users and
actual tenants which now live in a new in-place with rising rents and a
new everyday culture. Is this good for them?

### The role of public libraries in gentrification/revitalization

The text will now turn to the public libraries and their role in the
described processes at the Flon and the Riponne.

First, the case of the Flon. As mentioned, this area can be described
now as being in the third phase of gentrification. In 2012 a competition
for architectural concepts for a "maison du livre et du patrimoine" was
proclaimed by the city of Lausanne. (Ville de Lausanne, direction des
travaux service d’architecture 2012) This house should be placed at the
edge of the Flon, right where the last remainders of the second phase of
gentrification can be found. If opened, it will be the host of a youth
library, a public library, the city archives, and the historical comic
collection of the city. As already mentioned, this building could be
interpreted as the last brick in the redevelopment process of the Flon.
This should not be underestimated. The city did not choose anything for
this last stone, but a cultural institution like the library, which has
a standing in the public as a place for everybody. But who is this
"everybody"? The Flon now is a space for commercially oriented
businesses and the people who are attracted by those businesses, which
is not the whole population of the city.

Secondly, in the case of the Place de la Riponne, the temporary Café
Grenette included a branch of the city's public libraries. This small
branch was tailored to children and their parents. The collection
contained mainly printed materials for children (picture books, first
reader material, comics etc.). Although the library itself didn’t
announce anything on the concept and program of this specific branch, it
can be observed that especially on weekends this offer was used quite
strongly by young families. Again, this should not be underestimated.
Once more, the library was chosen as part of a process that could be
described as gentrification. Several other solutions would have been
possible. It could be asked, again, for whom this library is useful and
for whom not. Apparently the open drug scene, which is a part of the
"Riponne culture", is not the target group, but a group that previously
has not been part of this culture. Nonetheless, this should not be
understood as a critique against the library itself. It is without a
doubt an important task to provide some offers for children and their
parents. It is just, as gentrification itself, a complex situation.

These two libraries are not a seldom exception. Any deep research into
actual concepts of redevelopment of urban space provide examples for the
use of libraries within. When cities and other stakeholders reflect on
strategies to revitalize impoverished urban space, libraries turn up as
parts of these strategies again and again. (Lees, Slater & Wyly 2008)
There could be different reasons for this, but it could be assumed that
the reputation of public libraries as cultural spaces open to all is an
important reason. Again, the case of Riponne provides an example for
this phenomenon. As mentioned before, already in 2011 a local politician
formulate a strategy for the reanimation of the place and included a
public library. (Cordonier 2011)

These two examples led to several open questions regarding the role of
libraries within such urban revitalization processes. Some of the most
striking ones are presented as follow, intended to be starting points
for discussions within the library community.

-   It is self-evident that libraries should have an idea about the
    processes that happen around them, such as the ones which have been
    described in this text as gentrification. Obviously, this topic has
    become important in recent societal debates for a good reason. The
    question is, if libraries are aware of their participation in this
    processes, no matter if in active or passive ways? Libraries are,
    like the pioneers in the second phase of Holms model, in a
    conflicting position: They are both part and victim of those
    changes.

-   If libraries are always part of these changes, they could position
    themselves for or against them. The question is, if they should do
    so or not? Even if the answer is yes, it stands to discuss which
    position they should take. For instance: Should they foster urban
    development? Should they play an active role for the most socially
    vulnerable groups in the society? Or should they chose a middle
    ground? In any case, it should at least be discussed in an open way.

-   It is a matter of fact, if the libraries chose to stay passive, they
    will be utilized anyhow by the cities or investors. As
    gentrification has become part of societal debates, the decision to
    stay passive could mean to act against the interests of a part of
    the population. Again, this is a complex question and libraries can
    not escape this situation.

-   Should libraries be concerned with the effects of gentrification for
    the whole city? Usually, if one area becomes gentrified, another one
    impoverishes. People who leave a gentrified area, often don’t leave
    the town, but look for a new space within city limits. Can libraries
    integrate these changes into their long-term strategies and if so,
    how?

-   As gentrification is an important debate in the society, libraries
    also can define themselves as information centers. Being a
    democratic institution, libraries can present facts and different
    positions on this topic and become a place of public debate. This
    may not be reduced to the distribution of handouts of different
    interest groups, but can include, for instance, discussion rounds,
    workshops on the change of urban space around the library, or
    exhibitions. But should libraries do so?

### Résumé: As cities change, libraries can not choose to stand aside

Public libraries can't escape the development of the cities they are in.
In recent years, projects of revitalization of urban space have become
re-interpreted as gentrification, whereas gentrification is perceive as
a complex process, with negative and positive effects. On the one hand,
gentrification, especially in the second phase, is seen as a rise of
cultural possibilities and a new life for former impoverished areas. But
on the other hand, gentrification became a word for displacement of poor
and socially vulnerable groups by better-of people of the middle class
and, in the third phase, a synonym for the commercialization of former
interesting urban spaces. Furthermore, it is, in some way, a paradox
process, because the people who seem to initiate it usually don’t want
to cause the negative effects mentioned above.

Here Lausannes situation and two of its neighborhoods have been used to
discuss this process in light of the involvement of public libraries.
Because the concept of gentrification is apparently not yet a topic of
discussion in the library community, it took a long introduction for the
core subject of the text. This is common for topics which arise as new.
Anyhow, the text also made it clear that libraries are part of this
process, no matter what. Therefore this article can be seen as a first
contribution to a necessary discussion, beyond the case of Switzerland,
as gentrification today is a process observed in all of the countries of
the Global North. (Less, Slater & Wyly 2008)

### Literature

Alonso-Provencio, Marta, and Antonio Da Cunha. "Qualification de lèspace
public, commerce et urbanisme durable: notes sur le cas lausannois".
*Revue Géographique de l’Est* 53, Nr. 3–4 (2013): 1–16.

Andres, Lauren. "Temps de veille de la friche urbaine et diversité des
processus d’appropriation: la Belle de Mai (Marseille) et le Flon
(Lausanne)". *Géocarrefour* 81, Nr. 2 (2006): 159–66.

Andres, Lauren, and Boris Grésillon. "Cultural brownfields in European
cities: a new Mainstream object for cultural and urban policies".
*International Journal of Cultural Policy* 19, Nr. 1 (2013): 40–62.
doi:10.1080/10286632.2011.625416.

Anonymous. "Le Flon secret?: Une galerie". *gazette du flon*. October
1989.

Barata, Andreia et al. "Passage Riant-Mont: pas de zone de ‚non-droit‘."
Blog. Lausanne Tunnel*.* Accessed 7 september 2014.
<http://lausannetunnel.wordpress.com/>.

Bonal, Keriam, and Sigmar Gude. "Gentrifizierung oder Wiederkehr der
Wohnungsnot?: Sozialstrukturelle Entwicklungstendenzen in Berliner
Innenstadtwohngebieten". In *Reclaim Berlin: Soziale Kämpfe in der
neoliberalen Stadt*, edited by Andrej Holm, 27–49. Berlin; Hamburg:
Assoziation A, 2014.

Cachin, Jérôme. "Lausanne veut «rendre» la place de la Riponne aux
habitants", 11 april 2014.
<http://www.laliberte.ch/news/regions/vaud/lausanne-veut-rendre-la-place-de-la-riponne-aux-habitants-233427>.

Chesnay, Catherine, Céline Bellot, and Marie-Ève Sylvestre.
"Judiciarisation des personnes itinérantes à Québec: une géographie des
pratiques policières répressives au service de la revitalisation".
*EchoGéo* 28, Nr. avril / juin (2014): 2–17.

Cordonier, Gérald. "Lausanne a un plan d’enfer pour redessiner la
Riponne". Journal. *24 heures*, 18 february 2011.
<http://archives.24heures.ch/vaud-regions/actu-vaud-regions/lausanne-plan-enfer-redessiner-riponne-2011-02-18>.

De Paola, Vicky. "Lausanne veut rendre la place de la Riponne à ses
habitants". *Les News, Blog de la Rédaction, Rouge FM, Yes.fm*, 10 april
2014.
<http://blogredaction.rougefm.com/actu/lausanne-veut-rendre-la-place-de-la-riponne-a-ses-habitants/>.

Dép. Culture, Sports, Patrimoine, Travaux, Ville Lausanne. "Préavis
2003/3: Place de la Riponne 10 - Rénovation et transformation du cinéma
Romandie", 23 januar 2003.
<http//www2.lausanne.ch/export/actualites/Next/serve.php?id=1166>.

DeSena, Judith N. *Gentrification and Inequality in Brooklyn: The New
Kids on the Block*. Lanham: Lexington Books, 2009.

Détraz, Alain, and Giroud, Fanny. "Violente bagarre à la Riponne".
Tribune de Genève, 19 September 2012.
<http://www.tdg.ch/suisse/faits-divers/violente-bagarre-riponne/story/17584527>.

Fondation ABS. "Le Distribus". Accessed 30 August 2014.
<http://www.fondationabs.ch/Distribus.htm>.

Godsil, Rachel D. "The Gentrification Trigger: Autonomy, Mobility, and
Affirmatively Furthering Fair Housing". *Brooklyn Law Review* 78, Nr. 2
(2013): 319–38.

Hae, Laam. *The Gentrification of Nightlife and the Right to the City:
Regulating Spaces of Social Dancing in New York*. Routledge Advances in
Geography. New York; London: Routledge, 2012.

Heinen, Christina M. "*Tief in Neukölln": Soundkulturen zwischen
Improvisation und Gentrifizierung in einem Berliner Bezirk*. Studien zur
Popularmusik. Bielefeld: transcript Verlag, 2013.

Holm, Andrej. "Gentrification in Berlin: Neue Investionsstrategien und
lokale Konflikte". In *Die Besonderheit des Städtischen:
Entwicklungslininen der Stadt(soziologie)*, edited by Heike Hermann,
Carsten Keller, Rainer Neef, and Renate Ruhne, 213–32. Wiesbaden: VS
Verlag für Sozialwissenschaften, 2011.

———. "Reclaim Berlin". In *Reclaim Berlin: Soziale Kämpfe in der
neoliberalen Stadt*, edited by Andrej Holm, 7–24. Berlin; Hamburg:
Assoziation A, 2014.

Kraushaar, Beat. "Schweiz am Sonntag - Die offene Drogenszene von
Lausanne". *Schweiz am Sonntag*. Accessed 30 august 2014.
<http://www.sonntagonline.ch/ressort/nachrichten/2418/>.

Kullmann, Katja. *Rasende Ruinen: Wie Detroit sich neu erfindet*.
edition suhrkamp digital. Berlin: Suhrkamp, 2012.

Lees, Loretta, Tom Slater, and Elvin Wyly. *Gentrification*. New York:
Routledge, 2008.

Lévy, Jacques. "Der Raum als öffentliches Gut". *Forum Raumentwicklung*
41, Nr. 3 (2013): 25–28.

Maspoli, Par Philippe. "Lausanne: Le marché de la Riponne souffre de
l’insécurité". *24 heures*, 19 april 2013.
<http://www.24heures.ch/vaud-regions/lausanne-region/Le-marche-de-la-Riponne-souffre-de-l-insecurite-/story/21715145>.

Morel, Géraldine. "Marginalité urbaine, espace public et usage de
droguue: Lausanne, automne 2012", 31 january 2013.
<http://www.chanvre-info.ch/info/fr/Marginalite-urbaine-espace-public.html>.

Naegler, Laura. *Gentrification and Resistance: Cultural criminology,
control, and the commodification of urban protest in Hamburg*. Hamburger
Studien zur Kriminologie und Kriminalpolitik 50. Berlin: LIT Verlag,
2012.

Prince, Sabiyha. *African Americans and Gentrification in Washington,
D.C.: Race, Class and Social Justice in the Nation’s Capital*. Urban
Anthropology. Farnham; Burlington: Ashgate, 2014.

Rohrer, Joshua. "[Lettre aux voisins de Riponne]", July 2014.

RTS. "Couleurs locales - VD: la place de la Riponne à Lausanne,
autrefois lieu de rassemblement convivial, est aujourd’hui le lieu de
rendez-vous des dealers, toxicomanes et autres marginaux". Téléjournal.
*rts.ch*, 19 december 2011.
<http://www.rts.ch/video/info/couleurs-locales/3661310-vd-la-place-de-la-riponne-a-lausanne-autrefois-lieu-de-rassemblement-convivial-est-aujourd-hui-le-lieu-de-rendez-vous-des-dealers-toxicomanes-et-autres-marginaux.html>.

Sassen, Saskia. *The global city: New York, London, Tokyo*. 2. edit.
Princeton, NJ; Oxford: Princeton University Press, 2001.

Schuetz, Jenny. *Do Art Galleries Stimulate Redevelopment?*. University
of Southern California Lusk Center, 2013.
<http://ssrn.com/abstract=2305430>.

Stadt Zürich Präsidialdepartement. "Deutlicher Anstieg der
Leerwohnungszahl". Press release. Zürich, 6 august 2014.
<https://www.stadt-zuerich.ch/prd/de/index/ueber_das_departement/medien/medienmitteilungen/2014/august/140806a.html>.

Stock, Miriam. *Der Geschmack der Gentrifizierung: Arabische Imbisse in
Berlin*. Urban Studies. Bielefeld: transcript, 2013.

Téléjournal RTS. "le 19:30 - Local d’injection à Lausanne: le peuple dit
clairement non". Téléjournal. *rts.ch*, 8 july 2007.
<http://www.rts.ch/video/info/journal-19h30/1488259-local-d-injection-a-lausanne-le-peuple-dit-clairement-non.html>.

Terrin, Jean-Jacques. "La ville et ses créateurs / The City and its
creators". In *La ville des createurs / The city of creators: Berlin,
Brimingham, Lausanne, Lyon, Montpellier, Montréal, Nantes, Montréal*,
edited by Jean-Jacques Terrin, 12–27. Marseille: Editions parenthèses,
2012.

Ville de Lausanne. "Bulletin du Conseil communal Lausanne" 125e année,
No 6 (27 september 2011).
<http://www.lausanne.ch/lausanne-officielle/conseil-communal/bulletins-du-conseil-communal/bulletins-2011/mainArea/00/links/01111/linkBinary/BCC_06_II%20du%2008.11.11_Voiblet_spb.pdf>.

———. "Bulletin du Conseil communal Lausanne" 125e année , No 4 (27
september 2011).
<http://www.lausanne.ch/lausanne-officielle/conseil-communal/bulletins-du-conseil-communal/bulletins-2011/mainArea/00/links/0116/linkBinary/BCC_04_I%20du%2027.09.11_Voiblet.pdf>.

———. "Bulletin du Conseil communal Lausanne" 126e année, No 10 (17
january 2012).
<http://www.lausanne.ch/lausanne-officielle/conseil-communal/bulletins-du-conseil-communal/bulletins-2012/mainArea/00/links/019/linkBinary/Bulletin%20du%20Conseil%20No%2010-II%20du%2017.01.12%20-%20spblanches.pdf>.

———. "Redynamiser la place de la Riponne: Conférence de presse du 10
avril 2014", 10 april 2014.
<http://www2.lausanne.ch/export/actualites/Next/serve.php?id=4211>.

Ville de Lausanne, direction des travaux service d’architecture.
*Construction de la «Maison du livre et du patrimoine» (bibliothèque
et archives de la Ville de Lausanne): Rapport du Jury*. Rapport du jury.
Lausanne: Ville de Lausanne, 18 december 2012.
<http://www.lausanne.ch/lausanne-officielle/administration/travaux/architecture/concours/concours-archives/maison-du-livre-et-du-patrimoine/mainArea/00/col2/04/text_files/file0/document/RapJury_ConcoursVigie-Gonin_Final.pdf>.

Zuppinger, Urs. *Luttes-ô-Flon: une reconversion urbaine lausannoise
mouvementée de 1984 à 2012*. Lausanne: Éditions d’En Bas, 2012.

Zehr, Angelo. "Uf de Gass: Ein Stück Lebensschule," 2014.
<http://www.uf-de-gass.ch/>.


[^1]: Holm gained somewhat of prominence right at the time, when
    gentrification as a term became known outside of sociology and
    political activism, when in 2007 he was – together with three other
    people – arrested on behalf of the Federal Attorney General of
    Germany and accused of membership of a left-wing, terrorist group
    called ‘militante gruppe’. In the progress of the case it became
    clear, that authorities had added Holm to the group because both
    used the terms "gentrification" and "precarization" in their texts.
    The detention of Holm became a political issue when several
    international scientists signed a declaration for Holm. No charges
    against Holm were pressed, but this story became one of the starting
    points for the popularity of the term "gentrification" in the German
    public.

[^2]: This doesn’t mean that homeowners always estimate the potential
    rents correctly. Sometimes, they overestimate the demand or
    financial possibilities of potential tenants. This seems to be the
    case in Zürich, where recently a growing number of high-priced new
    apartments have problems to find new tenants, although the demand
    for apartments is still high. (Stadt Zürich Präsidialdepartement
    2014)

[^3]: Hae (2012) analyzed those contradictory changes in New York
    nightlife, when parts of the city moved from the second to the third
    phase of gentrification and described it as a process of becoming
    "boring" (DeSena 2009), while still trying to profit from the
    picture of a highly vitalized city life fostered in the first and
    second phase: "As the city has experienced gentrification throughout
    the last three decades, ‘noisy’ and ‘boisterous’ nightlife
    businesses in gentrifying neighborhoods, including bars and lounges
    as well as dance clubs, have been censured as the number one enemy
    of ‘quality of life’ in these neighborhoods due to their nuisance
    effects. Ironically, this process has gone on even as the real
    estate sector trumpeted and marketed the profile of nightlife in
    these communities as a sign of neighborhood vibrancy in order to
    boost property values. That is, nightlife establishments and their
    cultural elements have been one of the important catalysts for
    gentrification of the very neighborhoods in which the presence of
    these businesses, later, have been intensely contested by groups of
    gentry that have moved here." (Hae 2012, 2)

[^4]: For instance, when Christina M. Heinen (Heinen 2013) did her
    research on the musical cultures in Berlin-Neukölln - one of
    Berlin’s gentrification areas - in 2008 to 2010, she received a
    strict rejection for an interview from one musician, because she, as
    a researcher, was seen as part of the gentrification process and the
    musician wished to have no part in this: "At first the field
    researchers arrive, then the diggers." (Heinen 2013, 30. "Erst
    kommen die Feldforscher, dann die Bagger.")

[^5]: This book was written as a retrospective of one of the most
    involved member of the APAHF. Although it includes an immense batch
    of otherwise unknown sources, it surely presents the position of the
    APAHF in a good light. Nevertheless, the influence of the group
    should not be underestimated, as they won popular votes in the city
    and had a high publicity in the public debate.

[^6]: It has to be mentioned, that temporary or, rather connected to the
    topic of gentrification, "pop-up" branches of public libraries are
    not an unusual concept in Switzerland. Especially in the summer,
    library branches in parks, public pools, and other public or
    "tourist" places are quite common.

[^7]: DeSena (DeSena 2009) describes such a renovation project in
    Greenpoint, NY, were a rundown water park, that had been closed in
    the 1980s and was – despite engagements of community groups – left
    to rotten, had been renovated and opened again right at the time
    gentrification took of in Greenpoint, when working-class tenants
    left the neighborhood and middle-class people were moving in. She
    sees such projects, which take place right when gentrification
    starts – the beginning of the second phase in Holms model – as
    characteristic for such processes.
